docs/CIRCULAR_DEPENDENCY_FIX.md, before:

# NonDelegateAction Circular Dependency Fix

## Problem

The NEAR OpenAPI specification has a circular dependency between `Action`, `DelegateAction`, and `NonDelegateAction` schemas that causes TypeScript to lose type inference, requiring `: any` type annotations.

### The Circular Dependency Chain

1. `Action` schema includes all action types, including `Delegate`
2. `Delegate` action contains a `SignedDelegateAction`  
3. `SignedDelegateAction` contains a `DelegateAction`
4. `DelegateAction` contains an array of `NonDelegateAction`
5. `NonDelegateAction` in the spec uses `allOf` to reference `Action` ❌ **This creates the circle**

```
Action → Delegate → SignedDelegateAction → DelegateAction → NonDelegateAction → Action
```

## Current Workaround in Main Branch

The main branch handles this by adding `: any` type annotations to these schemas:
- `ActionSchema: any`
- `DelegateActionSchema: any`
- `SignedDelegateActionSchema: any`
- `NonDelegateActionSchema: any`

This works but loses all TypeScript type safety and IDE support for these critical types.

## Solution Demonstrated in This Branch

This branch modifies the code generator to handle `NonDelegateAction` specially by:
1. Detecting when generating `NonDelegateActionSchema`
2. Instead of following the spec's `allOf: [{$ref: "#/components/schemas/Action"}]`
3. Explicitly generating a union of all action types EXCEPT `Delegate`

### Implementation

The fix is in `tools/codegen/generate.ts`:

```typescript
if (schemaName === 'NonDelegateAction') {
  // NonDelegateAction should explicitly list all actions except Delegate
  // This breaks the circular dependency with DelegateAction
  const actionSchema = schemas['Action'];
  if (actionSchema && actionSchema.oneOf) {
    // Filter out the Delegate action
    const nonDelegateActions = actionSchema.oneOf.filter((action: any) => {
      return !action.properties || !action.properties.Delegate;
    });
    
    // Generate the union of all non-delegate actions
    const actionOptions = nonDelegateActions.map((action: any) => 
      generateZodSchema(action, schemas, 1)
    );
    zodMiniSchema = `z.union([${actionOptions.join(', ')}])`;
  }
}
```

This generates:
```typescript
export const NonDelegateActionSchema = () => z.union([
  z.object({ CreateAccount: z.lazy(() => CreateAccountActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeployContract: z.lazy(() => DeployContractActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ FunctionCall: z.lazy(() => FunctionCallActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ Transfer: z.lazy(() => TransferActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ Stake: z.lazy(() => StakeActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ AddKey: z.lazy(() => AddKeyActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeleteKey: z.lazy(() => DeleteKeyActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeleteAccount: z.lazy(() => DeleteAccountActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeployGlobalContract: z.lazy(() => DeployGlobalContractActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ UseGlobalContract: z.lazy(() => UseGlobalContractActionSchema()) })
]);
```

## Benefits

With this fix:
1. ✅ No more `: any` type annotations needed
2. ✅ Full TypeScript type inference restored
3. ✅ IDE autocomplete and type checking work properly
4. ✅ All tests pass
5. ✅ No runtime behavior changes

## Ideal Solution

The ideal fix would be in the OpenAPI specification itself. The spec maintainers should change `NonDelegateAction` from:

```json
{
  "NonDelegateAction": {
    "allOf": [
      {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/Action"}
    ],
    "description": "..."
  }
}
```

To:

```json
{
  "NonDelegateAction": {
    "oneOf": [
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"CreateAccount": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/CreateAccountAction"}}, "required": ["CreateAccount"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeployContract": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeployContractAction"}}, "required": ["DeployContract"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"FunctionCall": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/FunctionCallAction"}}, "required": ["FunctionCall"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"Transfer": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/TransferAction"}}, "required": ["Transfer"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"Stake": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/StakeAction"}}, "required": ["Stake"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"AddKey": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/AddKeyAction"}}, "required": ["AddKey"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeleteKey": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeleteKeyAction"}}, "required": ["DeleteKey"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeleteAccount": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeleteAccountAction"}}, "required": ["DeleteAccount"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeployGlobalContract": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeployGlobalContractAction"}}, "required": ["DeployGlobalContract"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"UseGlobalContract": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/UseGlobalContractAction"}}, "required": ["UseGlobalContract"]}
    ],
    "description": "..."
  }
}
```

This would properly express that `NonDelegateAction` is any action type except `Delegate`, breaking the circular dependency at the specification level.

## Testing

Run the following to verify the fix works:
```bash
# Regenerate types
pnpm generate

# Run type checking
pnpm typecheck

# Run tests
pnpm test --run
```

All tests pass with full type safety restored.

Commit message:

chore: use fixed OpenAPI spec from nearcore PR
Switch to using the fixed OpenAPI spec from petersalomonsen's nearcore PR
that properly fixes the NonDelegateAction circular dependency at the spec level.

The spec now correctly defines NonDelegateAction with oneOf listing all
action types except Delegate, breaking the circular dependency chain.

Results:
- No more : any type annotations needed
- Full TypeScript type safety restored
- All tests pass
- Generator code simplified (removed workarounds)

Using spec from:
https://raw.githubusercontent.com/petersalomonsen/nearcore/0c5d2f7d45321341a2b367a60e930dceb44cbe9d/chain/jsonrpc/openapi/openapi.json

Once the PR is merged to nearcore master, we can switch back to the
official spec URL.

docs/CIRCULAR_DEPENDENCY_FIX.md, after:

# NonDelegateAction Circular Dependency Fix

> **✅ FIXED**: The fix has been implemented in nearcore PR by @petersalomonsen
> 
> This branch now uses the fixed OpenAPI spec from that PR:
> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/petersalomonsen/nearcore/0c5d2f7d45321341a2b367a60e930dceb44cbe9d/chain/jsonrpc/openapi/openapi.json

## Problem

The NEAR OpenAPI specification has a circular dependency between `Action`, `DelegateAction`, and `NonDelegateAction` schemas that causes TypeScript to lose type inference, requiring `: any` type annotations.

### The Circular Dependency Chain

1. `Action` schema includes all action types, including `Delegate`
2. `Delegate` action contains a `SignedDelegateAction`  
3. `SignedDelegateAction` contains a `DelegateAction`
4. `DelegateAction` contains an array of `NonDelegateAction`
5. `NonDelegateAction` in the spec uses `allOf` to reference `Action` ❌ **This creates the circle**

```
Action → Delegate → SignedDelegateAction → DelegateAction → NonDelegateAction → Action
```

## Current Workaround in Main Branch

The main branch handles this by adding `: any` type annotations to these schemas:
- `ActionSchema: any`
- `DelegateActionSchema: any`
- `SignedDelegateActionSchema: any`
- `NonDelegateActionSchema: any`

This works but loses all TypeScript type safety and IDE support for these critical types.

## Solution Demonstrated in This Branch

This branch modifies the code generator to handle `NonDelegateAction` specially by:
1. Detecting when generating `NonDelegateActionSchema`
2. Instead of following the spec's `allOf: [{$ref: "#/components/schemas/Action"}]`
3. Explicitly generating a union of all action types EXCEPT `Delegate`

### Implementation

The fix is in `tools/codegen/generate.ts`:

```typescript
if (schemaName === 'NonDelegateAction') {
  // NonDelegateAction should explicitly list all actions except Delegate
  // This breaks the circular dependency with DelegateAction
  const actionSchema = schemas['Action'];
  if (actionSchema && actionSchema.oneOf) {
    // Filter out the Delegate action
    const nonDelegateActions = actionSchema.oneOf.filter((action: any) => {
      return !action.properties || !action.properties.Delegate;
    });
    
    // Generate the union of all non-delegate actions
    const actionOptions = nonDelegateActions.map((action: any) => 
      generateZodSchema(action, schemas, 1)
    );
    zodMiniSchema = `z.union([${actionOptions.join(', ')}])`;
  }
}
```

This generates:
```typescript
export const NonDelegateActionSchema = () => z.union([
  z.object({ CreateAccount: z.lazy(() => CreateAccountActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeployContract: z.lazy(() => DeployContractActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ FunctionCall: z.lazy(() => FunctionCallActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ Transfer: z.lazy(() => TransferActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ Stake: z.lazy(() => StakeActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ AddKey: z.lazy(() => AddKeyActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeleteKey: z.lazy(() => DeleteKeyActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeleteAccount: z.lazy(() => DeleteAccountActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ DeployGlobalContract: z.lazy(() => DeployGlobalContractActionSchema()) }),
  z.object({ UseGlobalContract: z.lazy(() => UseGlobalContractActionSchema()) })
]);
```

## Benefits

With this fix:
1. ✅ No more `: any` type annotations needed
2. ✅ Full TypeScript type inference restored
3. ✅ IDE autocomplete and type checking work properly
4. ✅ All tests pass
5. ✅ No runtime behavior changes

## Ideal Solution

The ideal fix would be in the OpenAPI specification itself. The spec maintainers should change `NonDelegateAction` from:

```json
{
  "NonDelegateAction": {
    "allOf": [
      {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/Action"}
    ],
    "description": "..."
  }
}
```

To:

```json
{
  "NonDelegateAction": {
    "oneOf": [
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"CreateAccount": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/CreateAccountAction"}}, "required": ["CreateAccount"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeployContract": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeployContractAction"}}, "required": ["DeployContract"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"FunctionCall": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/FunctionCallAction"}}, "required": ["FunctionCall"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"Transfer": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/TransferAction"}}, "required": ["Transfer"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"Stake": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/StakeAction"}}, "required": ["Stake"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"AddKey": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/AddKeyAction"}}, "required": ["AddKey"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeleteKey": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeleteKeyAction"}}, "required": ["DeleteKey"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeleteAccount": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeleteAccountAction"}}, "required": ["DeleteAccount"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"DeployGlobalContract": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/DeployGlobalContractAction"}}, "required": ["DeployGlobalContract"]},
      {"type": "object", "properties": {"UseGlobalContract": {"$ref": "#/components/schemas/UseGlobalContractAction"}}, "required": ["UseGlobalContract"]}
    ],
    "description": "..."
  }
}
```

This would properly express that `NonDelegateAction` is any action type except `Delegate`, breaking the circular dependency at the specification level.

## Testing

Run the following to verify the fix works:
```bash
# Regenerate types
pnpm generate

# Run type checking
pnpm typecheck

# Run tests
pnpm test --run
```

All tests pass with full type safety restored.
